Analog to Digital Conversion
Converting information from analog to digital is not a neutral process. Most ADCs are capable of relatively colorless reproduction, but there are aesthetic and practical decisions made throughout that affect the sound including sample rate, dither and bit depth. At low bit depths (as is the case in old digital delays and reverbs that producers are so fond of), very important tradeoffs involving distortion and noise must occur. These are often important to the character of a given delay, reverb or sampler.

Sampling:

The first step in converting this analog signal into a digital format is sampling. Sampling involves measuring the amplitude of the analog signal at regular intervals, known as the sampling rate. According to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem, the sampling rate must be at least twice the highest frequency present in the analog signal to accurately capture all the information. For audio, the standard sampling rate is 44.1 kHz, which is sufficient to capture the full range of human hearing, typically up to 20 kHz. Of course, this leaves a very small transition band so that converters either use very steep analog filters (which the reason old CDs sound so brittle and piercing) or the overclock the sample on the input and use a simple digital averaging filter (which can apply gain reduction to the higher frequencies, without the phase distortion introduced by 8 pole analog filters) to remove the higher frequencies before stepping down to the sample rate on the box. Only the oldest audio interfaces actually convert at 44.1k.

Quantization:

Once the signal is sampled, each sample is quantized. Quantization is the process of mapping the continuous amplitude values of the analog signal to a finite set of discrete levels. This introduces quantization error, which is the difference between the actual analog value and the nearest quantized value. The number of discrete levels is determined by the bit depth, which is the number of bits used to represent each sample. A higher bit depth allows for more levels and thus a more accurate representation of the analog signal. CD-quality audio, for example, uses a bit depth of 16 bits, allowing for 65,536 discrete levels. Keep in mind, we don't hear amplitude linearly, so although we realistically only hear a few hundred discrete "steps" in terms of amplitude (most people have a hard time hearing amplitude changes of half a decibel), most of these converters convert energy linearly. Older devices such as the CMI Fairlight and the Lexicon LCM-41 use companders to map the amplitude more closely to the range of human hearing given the relatively small number of bits. This results in less audible noise and more distortion. Since most converters sample at a much higher bit depth, than this 65,536 at the absolute minimum, rather than the 256 discrete points afforded in 8-bit converters.

Binary:

After quantization, the digital audio signal is represented as a sequence of binary numbers, each corresponding to a quantized sample. These are actually voltages which control electronic gates. This digital representation can be stored, processed, and transmitted with the advantages of digital technology, such as error correction, compression, and efficient storage. Because each bit only has to store one piece of information (whether the voltage is low or high) any analog variations in this voltage are irrelevant as long as they do not cross the threshold into the opposite state and they do not occur in the final conversion stage.
Imagine that you were making a number like 123 and you have the numbers  1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 to make that number, you’d use 64 + 32 + 16 + 4 + 2 + 1 to make it. The numbers in positions 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7 would be turned on and the rest would be turned off, so in binary, this would be spelt 11101110. These on off voltages (which are all stored with exactly the same value and associated voltage) are converted back into analog  based on their position in the sequence. Resistor values (resistors are electrical components that essentially lower the output voltage) are doubled for each bit, so that the voltage is reduced accordingly when the signal is converted back into an analog form.

Conversion Back to Analog:

However, as I mentioned, the conversion process is not perfect. One of the primary concerns is aliasing, which occurs when the sampling rate is too low to accurately capture the signal's frequency content. Aliasing results in distortion, as higher frequencies are incorrectly represented as lower frequencies. The relationship of the alias to the original pitch is sample rate - (original pitch - Nyquist frequency). So, for example in 44.1k system a 22,200 hz waveform would instead be rendered as an alias at 22,000 hz. To prevent aliasing, an anti-aliasing filter is applied to the analog signal before sampling, removing frequencies above half the sampling rate.
Another challenge is managing quantization noise, which is inherent in the quantization process. While increasing the bit depth can reduce quantization noise, it also increases the amount of data that must be stored and processed. Techniques such as dithering, which adds a small amount of noise to the signal before quantization, can help minimize the perceptual impact of quantization noise. The reason for this is that, generally speaking the limits of analog information are noise (hold a magnifying glass to a printed image or listen to a cassette tape with no sound recorded to it, to get a sense of what I mean), and the limits of digital information is clipping distortion at the peak and quantization distortion at the bottom. You can perform your own dither with a test oscillator in your DAW of choice. Put a Bit Crusher on the master track and set the bit depth to a low value such that the distortion is audible. Then add another track with white noise. Slowly bring up the volume of the noise and you will hear the distortion disappear. It's a fun party trick and gives you an aural demonstration of what dither sounds like.
————
Filters:
 
There are two basic types of digital filter implementations. FIR and IIR, or Finite Impulse Response and Infinite Impulse response, respectively. This sounds really intimidating (or it did to me at least). It’s actually not very complicated at all. Unfortunately, the way it is explained is almost always terrible. Do you know what y[n] = (1-α) × x[n] + α × y[n-1] means? What does this have to do with music. How does this explain anything????
 
It does, if you already know what every symbol means and what we’re actually doing. This is not very helpful to musicians—even the inevitable students who tell me “I just want to know the math.” Trust me, you don’t want to know the math. If you’re like me, what you really want to know is the mechanics of it, the “why,” and possibly the “how”. I’m going to explain it a few ways.   The simple difference is: Infinite Impulse Response Filters use delays with feedback—and therefore can mix in an infinite number of past samples. Finite Impulse Response filters use multi-tap delays and therefor use a limited (aka finite) number of past states. That’s it.   So what does this have to do with filters? Well, let’s break it down to something even simpler. A low pass filter creates an average between two or more states. States is probably more fancy than necessary, we can call them amplitude measurements or numbers if that’s easier. When those numbers change faster, we hear that as the pitch of the sound rising, when the move slower, the pitch drops. If we average two states together so that they become, in effect, one unchanging state, any oscillation that occurs between those states becomes suppressed, meaning we don’t hear it.
 
Sound is produced because air is compressed and rarefied before it reaches our ears and is translated into electrical current that pass through our cochlear nerves and sent to our brain. In order for that compression and rarefaction to occur, a speaker has to move back and forth. In order for the speaker to move back and forth, the magnet on the back of the speaker has to be moved by an electromagnetic whose polarity follows that of the electricity conducted through the wire. Electricity and magnetism are the same force, so by coiling a wire with electricity flowing through it we can induce a magnetic field of the same polarity as the current flowing through it. What starts the whole process? Changes in electrical current. Computers have digital to analog converters that can produce those changes in electrical current to arbitrary levels of precision. This is what allows us to make sound with a computer.   Imagine we have some white noise. It is digital, so it can be described as a bunch of floating-point numbers (meaning .12341234 or whatever so we can generate values between -1 and 1 with a high level of precision). This white noise contains an even distribution of sine waves at all frequencies, at least within half the sample rate—remember we need at least two points of data to create a sine wave, so the Nyquist frequency, the highest frequency we can represent is half the sample rate. If we take every two samples, add them together and divide by two, we’ll have completely cancelled out the part of the white noise that sits at the Nyquist frequency, and everything below it will be steadily less effected.   Why? Well first let me take a second to say I told you so about the math. Okay, here’s why. Remember those middle school stats problems where you had to calculate averages? Something along the lines of: A school cafeteria restocks their pantry every two days. Joe and Rena have to calculate the average number of hamburgers their cafeteria sells in two-day intervals. On day one they sell six hamburgers and on day two they sell seven hamburgers. How many hamburgers did they sell on average?
6.5 hamburgers you say? Congratulations. You have built a simple FIR Low Pass Filter. Averages suppress rapid change, change = audibility. If a signal doesn’t change, it’s not audible. What about high pass? High pass filters eliminate the elements that remain the same, and only leave the changes. To make a FIR High Pass Filter, simply subtract the hamburgers sample values from each other.  This type of mathematical low pass filter is great and has many industrial uses. Your audio interface uses it to create perfectly band limited 44.1kHz recordings from the high sample rate DACs it uses.
There is an issue with it, however. The effect is fixed at a set frequency. Generally speaking, we want filters to be variable. In a FIR filter, in order to do this, we need a large number of taps with different levels for each tap set by a coefficient (something we multiply by). Multiplying is more efficient in computation than dividing, so we simply multiply each by a number between 0 and 1 to make the numbers smaller, aka lower their amplitude.  What about IIR filters? Well, they are built out of the sample stuff, but instead of using a multitap delay, we just need a single sample delay and a feedback loop. In this case we’re still averaging by mixing the present and previous states together, but instead of mixing them exactly 50% each, we feed them into a crossfader. Also, instead of delaying the input, we actually delay the output of the crossfader and feed that back into the second input of the crossfader. This makes it so that if we set the mix to 50/50, we will get half the input sample, half the previous sample, 25% of the sample before that, 12.5% of the one before that, and so on, all the way to infinity. Now, practically, we’re not going to hear infinite samples back, because 1. There are only a finite number of samples from our starting point and 2. The sound will be completely canceled before that. Still, in a theoretical, mathematical context, the design is infinite. From a practical perspective, we now have a filter that can be adjusted from the top of the range (no amplitude reduction whatsoever, just pure dry signal) to the bottom (average all possible signals).   This is also why one pole filters produce 6dB of gain reduction each octave. The higher the frequency, the closer it is to be completely averaged out. If you are at Nyquist, we can are completely averaged out, if we are an octave below, every other sample is averaged out, reducing the amplitude by 50% aka 6dB.
——

Compression

In audio processing, compression reduces the volume of loud sounds or amplifies quiet sounds by narrowing the dynamic range of an audio signal. This is achieved by setting a threshold level; when the input signal exceeds this threshold, the compressor reduces the gain of the signal. The amount of gain reduction is determined by the ratio setting of the compressor. For instance, a 4:1 ratio means that for every 4 dB the input signal exceeds the threshold, the output will only increase by 1 dB.
The feedback and feedforward methods refer to how the compressor determines the amount of gain reduction to apply. In both instances an absolute value function is performed before the input signal is sent into an envelope follower (call it a slew limiter if you want, it's the same thing).

Why do we need absolute value? Because if you're going to average something (which is how we measure the average amplitude), then having it go above and below zero by the same amount (which periodic signals tend to do), it will always average 0. Because -1 + 1 = 0. Now, we could shift the whole thing above zero, but that doesn't really solve the problem because you're still going to average to the same amount regardless of how far each side extends from the center (which is what we're really measuring). So, therefore, we need the absolute value of a bipolar signal to measure the volume.
How do we get absolute value? Through a process called full-wave rectification. This is a little annoying if you don't have a device that clips, but a VCA can serve the same purpose since it ignores negative voltage (and therefore clips the signal below zero). This is a bit wonky, but if you send a DC voltage into a VCA it and control it with an audio signal, your output will be a halfwave rectified version of that signal with only the top half coming through.

Then, if you invert the signal, it will reverse polarity, meaning the the negative half will be positive and the positive half will be negative. If you do the same process you did to the original signal, only the parts that were originally in the negative range will pass through (since they are now positive).
If you combine these together, your signal is now exclusively positive, which we can use to measure the average amplitude.

Now, if we take the output which has been converted to absolute value, we can measure the average magnitude by slew limiting it. 

Since we want to use the average volume of the signal to turn itself down (and hence lower the overall dynamic range) we need something that turns up all the way when we have the lowest amplitude value. So we invert it (so that it gets lower the higher the signal goes up) and then offset it above zero so that it's operating in a range that works with the VCA.

This means we get the original signal amplitude at low volume and it turns downs the louder the average volume gets.

Feedback Compression

In feedback compression, the compressor uses the output signal to control the gain reduction. This means that the signal is first processed by the compressor, and then the resulting output is fed back into the control circuit to determine the amount of compression needed. This method is often associated with vintage compressors and is known for its musical and smooth sound. The feedback design tends to react more slowly to changes in the input signal, which can be beneficial for certain types of audio, such as vocals or acoustic instruments, where a more natural sound is desired.
The basic thing to understand about this is, since the signal will already have been compressed, dynamic peaks may have already been reduced, which means that the feedback mechanism also introduces a degree of stability and self-regulation to the compressor. By continuously adjusting the gain reduction based on the output, the compressor can adapt to changes in the input signal, maintaining a consistent level of compression. This adaptability is particularly useful in live sound applications, where the audio signal can vary significantly over time.

However, feedback compressors also have limitations. One potential drawback is the introduction of latency, as the feedback loop requires time to process the output signal and adjust the gain reduction accordingly. This latency can be problematic in situations where real-time processing is critical. Additionally, the feedback mechanism can sometimes lead to overshoot or ringing, where the compressor overreacts to sudden changes in the signal, resulting in unwanted artifacts.

Feedforward Compression

Conversely, feedforward compression uses the input signal to control the gain reduction. In this method, the compressor analyzes the input signal before it is processed and uses this analysis to determine the amount of gain reduction. Feedforward compressors are typically more precise and faster in their response to changes in the input signal. This makes them suitable for applications where quick and accurate compression is required, such as in broadcast or live sound environments.
 
Flanging: Origins and Technical Aspects

Flanging is an audio effect that creates a sweeping, whooshing sound. It originated in the late 1940s and early 1950s, primarily through the experimentation of audio engineers, such Les Paul in recording studios. The term "flanging" is believed to have been coined by producer George Martin and John Lennon during the recording of The Beatles' Revolver. The effect was initially achieved by playing two identical audio tracks on separate tape machines, then slowing down one of the tapes by pressing a finger on the flange (the rim) of the tape reel. This caused a slight delay between the two tracks, resulting in a comb-filtering effect characterized by peaks and troughs in the frequency spectrum.

Flanging involves mixing two identical signals, with one signal delayed by a small, slowly modulated period of time, typically less than 20 milliseconds. This delay causes phase cancellations and reinforcements at various frequencies, creating the characteristic "jet plane" sound. The delay time is modulated, often with an LFO, to produce the sweeping effect.

——

Chorus: Development and Technical Characteristics

The chorus effect, like flanging, involves modulating a delayed audio signal. The delay times for chorus are longer than flangers, typically between 20 to 50 milliseconds, and, often, the modulation depth is lower. This creates a pseudo unison effect, as can be achieve with a chorus of singers, hence the name "chorus."
One of the most iconic chorus effects was produced by the Roland JC-120 Jazz Chorus amplifier, which uses a chorus spread between two speakers for a stereo chorus effect. In 1976, Roland also released one of the earliest, most influential chorus pedals: the Boss CE-1 Chorus Ensemble. The CE-1's design was lifted directly from the Jazz Chorus.
Chorus is achieved by mixing the original signal with one or more delayed and pitch-modulated copies. The modulation is typically achieved using an LFO, which varies the delay time and, consequently, the pitch of the delayed signal. On tape, this is achieved by continually varying the playback speed. If the playback speed is faster or slower than the original recording, the pitch will go up or down, proportionally. 
In a digital device, this means varying the sample rate or dropping samples/interpolation. When the sample rate of a digital buffer is changed, it will be read back the samples more quickly or slowly depending on the relationship between the current sample rate and the rate at which the original sample was originally recorded. If audio recorded at 44,100 Hz is played back at a sample rate of 22,050 Hz, the pitch will down by an octave. If it is played at 88,200 Hz, it will play at an octave up. Continually varying sample rates will produce smooth changes to the pitch. Dropping samples and interpolation serve a similar purpose in systems where the sample rate is fixed. By dropping one sample in set intervals, it is possible to lower the pitch by a fixed amount. Dropping half the samples will result in a doubling of pitch. In interpolation, intermediate samples are calculated between the existing samples at fixed intervals. By interpolating between every other sample, it is possible to drop the pitch by one octave.

For a stereo chorus, a classic way to achieve this is to start with a mono source and send it to two delays, panned hard left and right. By modulating the playback speed of left side with an LFO, and modulating the playback speed of the right a phase-inverted LFO, it is possible to achieve a stereo chorus where the pitch of the left and right sides move in opposite directions.

———
All Pass Filters and Reverb  All pass filters are some of the important tools within digital signal processing. Unfortunately they are also the most confusing for beginner DSP programmers and sound designers. The typical response I get when I ask what students think an all pass filter is, is nervous laughter. In the introductory synthesis course, after we learn about low pass, high pass and band pass filters, I ask students if all pass filters exist. They almost always answer unequivocally no. When I inform them that they do and ask what the function of an all pass is, they will sheepishly guess that perhaps it means that there is no filter at all.  It doesn’t help that the typical explanation goes something like “While most filters adjust the relationship of the frequencies within a signal, all pass filters shift phase.” Those who know what phase means will probably wonder why we are referring to them as filters as not delays. Let’s break through the confusion and explain what all pass filters are, where they are most commonly used and what makes them unique.  While it is true that all pass filters shift phase, this on its own isn’t terribly helpful. If you shifted all the frequency components phase by the same amount, that would simply be a delay. Low pass filters shift phase as well (as explained in our primitive low pass filter example), as do high pass filters and any filter, since, as we have shown, filters are built from delays. The most important difference with all pass filters is that different parts of the spectrum are delayed by different amounts while the amplitude of all the constituent waves of a sound remain the same. This means that the phase of the different frequency components shift in relation to each other.   All pass filters are poorly named. There are many designs you could create that would allow all frequencies to pass through with their amplitude unaffected. You could create an open circuit without any filtering and this would allow all frequencies to pass. Also, the very idea of a filter, as borrowed from our everyday use of the term, is a tool that removes certain components of a collective mass while preserving others. All pass filters do no such thing. What would be a better term? “Frequency Dependent Phase Shifters” would be more accurate.  So, ignoring the name. What do all pass filters do? They shift the phase of each of the sine waves making up a sound, by varying amounts. It’s a bit like taking different band pass outputs from a filterbank sending each individual filter band through different delays and then summing them together. In fact, that’s very similar to how analog allpass filters work–except they don’t have to apply an additional phase shift, they simply rely on the phase shifting introduced by the filters themselves.  A very basic operational amplifier-based all pass filter, like the ones used in analog phasors, works by separating the high and low frequencies with a capacitor that averages the values (aka a low pass filter), but instead of sending the high frequencies to ground and making them inaudible, they are combined with the original signal in its feedback path. This means that highs and lows are delayed by different amounts.  Normally allpass filters require feedback, but you could all use complementary positive and negative comb filters to achieve as long as the peaks of one match the valleys of the other.  So we now know more or less what they are, but what’s the value of them? One of the most important things all pass filters do is smear the transient of a signal. A sharp transient requires the phase alignment of varying frequencies; if you shift the phase of the different frequency components in relationship to each other, you will no longer have that alignment. You may wonder why anyone would want that, and that’s a fair question. The main reason is, all pass filters make repeats or loop points in a delay network less obvious. Because early reflections in a real room produce a kind of all pass filtering effect, all pass filters are generally the first thing that a signal passes through before entering the delay network or “tank”. Moorer notes that if all pass filters’ internal delays are too short, they produce an annoying, “puff puff” effect, and that if they are too long (above 6 milliseconds) they will produce audible repetitions–the very thing we’re using all pass filters to avoid later on the in the reverb tank. The goal of all pass filters within a reverb design is to “smear” the input signal so that it loses its rhythmic identity before entering a network of recirculating delays where an identifiable transient would provide a perceptual marker that would allow the listener to identify repetitions. This–along with a high buildup of early echo density–is what creates the sense of a smooth and aesthetically pleasing reverb. As Sean Costello of Valhalla DSP notes the simulation of a real room is still something our current computers are “orders of magnitude” away from in terms of computational power. To get around this, we use all pass filters, randomized delay modulation and clever routing within the delay feedback network to produce the impression of the complexity of echoes within a real room.   Remember, sound emerges as a sphere and reflects off every surface in the room–and each of those reflections have their own reflections. We simplify this by imaging that each wall has its own delay time, but each wall has infinite gradations of delay time, because the speaker is slightly closer or further away from every inch the wall extends in space and the formula for delay time in a room is twice the distance from the sound emitter (because it has to travel to the reflecting surface and back) divided by the speed of sound. Even accounting for the fact that some of the differences are too short to be perceptually noticeable, it is extremely computationally expensive to accurately simulate even the smallest of rooms. Therefore we fake it through modulation and other perceptual tricks.  ---
Vocoders

A vocoder (short for “voice encoder”) is an audio effect that captures the spectral characteristics of one sound (usually the human voice, called the modulator) and imposes those characteristics onto another sound (usually a synthesizer or other tonal source, called the carrier). To understand how a vocoder works, imagine a device with two inputs—one for the modulator and one for the carrier—each going through their own processing paths before being combined at the output.

Step 1: Splitting the Modulator Signal – Bandpass Filter Bank

The modulator input (such as someone speaking into a microphone) is first split into multiple frequency bands using a bank of bandpass filters. These filters are designed to isolate specific ranges of frequencies—like slicing the sound into narrow spectral pieces. Each filter focuses on a small part of the frequency spectrum, often overlapping slightly to cover the full range of intelligible speech (roughly 300 Hz to 3.4 kHz, though vocoders often use a broader range). The number of bands determines the resolution of the vocoder—more bands allow for a more detailed and intelligible result.

Step 2: Envelope Followers – Extracting Dynamics

After the modulator signal is split into bands, the next step is to track how the amplitude of each band changes over time. This is done using envelope followers, which analyze the output of each bandpass filter and generate a control voltage that follows the amplitude of the filtered signal.
An envelope follower consists of a rectifier (to convert the waveform to absolute positive values)—such as the abs object in gen~-followed by a slew limiter—such as slide, rampsmooth, line~, etc.—which smooths out rapid changes in amplitude to create a control voltage. Think of it as a low pass filter, but set below audio rate, and with independent control of rise and fall times. The slew limiter sets how quickly the envelope can rise or fall—if it’s too fast, the result is jittery; if it is too slow, you will lose articulation. This envelope effectively captures the rhythm and dynamics of each frequency band in the modulator signal.

Step 3: Carrier Signal – Raw Material for Shaping

While the modulator path is analyzing and breaking down the vocal input, the carrier signal enters on a parallel path. The carrier is usually a harmonically rich source like a sawtooth wave, square wave, or a chord. This is the raw material that will be shaped to by the vocal modulator.

Just like the modulator, the carrier is passed through its own bank of bandpass filters—usually matched in number and frequency bands to the modulator’s filter bank. 
Step 4: Voltage-Controlled Amplifiers (VCAs) – Shaping the Carrier
Each of the modulator’s envelope signals is used to control a VCA that processes the corresponding band of the carrier signal. For example, the envelope extracted from the 300–500 Hz band of the modulator controls the VCA for the 300–500 Hz band of the carrier, etc.

If the voice has a high amplitude value in the 1 kHz band, the envelope from that band will open the VCA and allow more of the 1 kHz band from the carrier to pass through. If there’s less energy in a particular band, that part of the carrier has its volume lowered. This is how the shape of the voice gets imprinted onto the carrier.

Step 5: Summing and Output

Once all the individual filtered-and-modulated bands of the carrier are shaped, they are summed together to produce the final output. The combined signal now has the harmonic content of the carrier, but shaped with the dynamic spectral shape of the voice. 

Optional Components and Enhancements

Some vocoders include additional components for clarity or control:

•    Noise generator: Because consonants have a lot of high-frequency noise, vocoders may add filtered white noise triggered by high-band envelopes to improve intelligibility. 
•    Unvoiced/voiced detector: This analyzes whether a sound is voiced (like vowels) or unvoiced (like “s” or “f”) and processes each differently for better articulation. Noisy signals tend to have higher concentrations of zero crossing and thus the rate of zero crossing can be used to switch between voiced and unvoiced articulations. Detectors can be used to switch between the harmonic carrier and noise.
•    Mix controls: Some vocoders allow you to blend in the original modulator or carrier.
•    Formant shifting: Some advanced vocoders let you offset the resynthesis bands to change the vocal timbre or pitch.

Historical Vocoder Band Spacing:

EMS Vocoder System 3000:

125, 185, 270, 350, 430, 530, 630, 780, 950, 1150, 1380, 2070, 2780, 3800, 6400

Roland SVC-350:

150, 220, 350, 500, 760, 1100, 1600, 2200, 3600, 5200, Highpass 6000

Other Filter Bank Spacing

Buchla 296

LPF 100, 150 250, 350, 500, 630, 800, 1000, 1300, 1600, 2000, 2600, 3500 5000, 8000, HPF 10000

Bark Scale:

60, 150, 250, 350, 450, 570, 700, 840, 1000, 1170, 1370, 1600, 1850, 2150, 2500, 2900, 3400, 4000, 4800, 5800, 7000, 8500, 10500, 13500
 
